===============================
Conservation of mass and energy
===============================

The concept of mass-energy equivalence connects the concepts of :index:`conservation of mass` and :index:`conservation of energy`, which continue to hold separately in any isolated system (one that is closed to loss of any type of energy, including energy associated with loss of matter). The :index:`theory of relativity` allows particles which have rest mass to be converted to other forms of mass which require motion, such as :index:`kinetic energy`, :index:`heat`, or :index:`light`. However, the system mass remains. Kinetic energy or light can also be converted to new kinds of particles which have rest mass, but again the energy remains. Both the :index:`total mass` and the :index:`total energy` inside an :index:`isolated system` remain constant over time, as seen by any single observer in a given inertial frame.

In other words, :index:`energy` can neither be created nor destroyed, and energy, in all of its forms, has mass. :index:`Mass` also can neither be created nor destroyed, and in all of its forms, has energy. According to the :index:`theory of relativity`, mass and energy as commonly understood, are two names for the same thing, and neither one is changed nor transformed into the other. Rather, neither one exists without the other existing also, as a property of a system. Rather than mass being changed into energy, the view of special relativity is that :index:`rest mass` has been changed to a more mobile form of mass, but remains mass. In the transformation process, neither the amount of mass nor the amount of energy changes, since both are properties which are connected to each other via a simple constant. [#f04]_ Thus, if energy leaves a system by changing its form, it simply takes its system mass with it. This view requires that if either mass or energy disappears from a system, it will always be found that both have simply moved off to another place, where they may both be measured as an increase of both mass and energy corresponding to the loss in the first system.

Fast-moving objects and systems of objects
==========================================

When an object is pulled in the direction of motion, it gains :index:`momentum` and energy, but when the object is already traveling near the :index:`speed of light`, it cannot move much faster, no matter how much energy it absorbs. Its momentum and energy continue to increase without bounds, whereas its speed approaches a constant value—the speed of light. This implies that in relativity the momentum of an object cannot be a constant times the :index:`velocity`, nor can the :index:`kinetic` energy be a constant times the square of the :index:`velocity`.

A property called the :index:`relativistic mass` is defined as the ratio of the momentum of an object to its velocity. [#f05]_ Relativistic mass depends on the motion of the object, so that different observers in relative motion see different values for it. If the object is moving slowly, the relativistic mass is nearly equal to the :index:`rest mass` and both are nearly equal to the usual :index:`Newtonian mass`. If the object is moving quickly, the relativistic mass is greater than the rest mass by an amount equal to the mass associated with the kinetic energy of the object. As the object approaches the speed of light, the relativistic mass grows infinitely, because the kinetic energy grows infinitely and this energy is associated with mass.

The relativistic mass is always equal to the :index:`total energy` (rest energy plus kinetic energy) divided by |c²|. [#f02]_ Because the relativistic mass is exactly proportional to the energy, relativistic mass and relativistic energy are nearly synonyms; the only difference between them is the units. If length and time are measured in :index:`natural units`, the speed of light is equal to 1, and even this difference disappears. Then mass and energy have the same units and are always equal, so it is redundant to speak about relativistic mass, because it is just another name for the energy. This is why physicists usually reserve the useful short word "mass" to mean rest-mass, or invariant mass, and not relativistic mass.

The relativistic mass of a moving object is larger than the relativistic mass of an object that is not moving, because a moving object has extra kinetic energy. The rest mass of an object is defined as the mass of an object when it is at rest, so that the rest mass is always the same, independent of the motion of the observer: it is the same in all inertial frames.

For things and systems made up of many parts, like an :index:`atomic nucleus`, :index:`planet`, or :index:`star`, the relativistic mass is the sum of the relativistic masses (or energies) of the parts, because energies are additive in closed systems. This is not true in systems which are open, however, if energy is subtracted. For example, if a system is *bound* by attractive forces, and the work the forces do in attraction is removed from the system, then mass will be lost with this removed energy. Such work is a form of energy which itself has mass, and thus mass is removed from the system, as it is bound. For example, the mass of an atomic nucleus is less than the total mass of the :index:`protons` and :index:`neutrons` that make it up, but this is only true after the energy (work) of :index:`binding` has been removed in the form of a :index:`gamma ray` (which in this system, carries away the mass of binding). This mass decrease is also equivalent to the energy required to break up the nucleus into individual protons and neutrons (in this case, work and mass would need to be supplied). Similarly, the mass of the :index:`solar system` is slightly less than the masses of sun and planets individually.

For a system of particles going off in different directions, the :index:`invariant mass` of the system is the analog of the rest mass, and is the same for all observers, even those in relative motion. It is defined as the :index:`total energy` (divided by |c²|) in the center of mass frame (where by definition, the system total momentum is zero). A simple example of an object with moving parts but :index:`zero total momentum`, is a container of gas. In this case, the mass of the container is given by its total energy (including the kinetic energy of the gas molecules), since the system total energy and invariant mass are the same in any reference frame where the momentum is zero, and such a :index:`reference frame` is also the only frame in which the object can be weighed. In a similar way, the theory of special relativity posits that the thermal energy in all objects (including solids) contributes to their total masses and weights, even though this energy is present as the kinetic and potential energies of the atoms in the object, and it (in a similar way to the gas) is not seen in the rest masses of the atoms that make up the object.

In a similar manner, even :index:`photons` (:index:`light quanta`), if trapped in a container space (as a photon gas or thermal radiation), would contribute a mass associated with their energy to the container. Such an extra mass, in theory, could be weighed in the same way as any other type of rest mass. This is true in special relativity theory, even though individually, photons have no rest mass. The property that :index:`trapped energy` *in any form* adds weighable mass to systems that have no net momentum, is one of the characteristic and notable consequences of :index:`relativity`. It has no classical counterpart in classical :index:`Newtonian physics`, in which radiation, light, heat, and kinetic energy never exhibit weighable mass under any circumstances.