================================
Consequences for nuclear physics
================================

:index:`Max Planck` pointed out that the :index:`mass–energy equivalence` formula implied that :index:`bound systems` would have a mass less than the sum of their constituents, once the binding energy had been allowed to escape. However, Planck was thinking about chemical reactions, where the binding energy is too small to measure. :index:`Einstein` suggested that radioactive materials such as radium would provide a test of the theory, but even though a large amount of energy is released per atom in radium, due to the half-life of the substance (1602 years), only a small fraction of radium atoms decay over experimentally measurable period of time.

Once the nucleus was discovered, experimenters realized that the very high binding energies of the atomic nuclei should allow calculation of their :index:`binding energies`, simply from mass differences. But it was not until the discovery of the :index:`neutron` in 1932, and the measurement of the neutron mass, that this calculation could actually be performed (see nuclear binding energy for example calculation). A little while later, the first :index:`transmutation reactions` (such as [#f12]_ the :index:`Cockcroft-Walton experiment`: |7Li+p → 2·4He|) verified Einstein's formula to an accuracy of ±0.5%. In 2005, Rainville et al. published a direct test of the energy-equivalence of mass lost in the binding-energy of a neutron to atoms of particular isotopes of silicon and sulfur, by comparing the mass-lost to the energy of the emitted gamma ray associated with the neutron capture. The binding mass-loss agreed with the gamma ray energy to a precision of ±0.00004%, the most accurate test of |E=mc²| to date. [#f03]_

The mass–energy equivalence formula was used in the development of the :index:`atomic bomb`. By measuring the mass of different atomic nuclei and subtracting from that number the total mass of the protons and neutrons as they would weigh separately, one gets the exact binding energy available in an :index:`atomic nucleus`. This is used to calculate the energy released in any :index:`nuclear reaction`, as the difference in the total mass of the nuclei that enter and exit the reaction.